# 1.1 Introduction

KC3 is currently a programming language project, inspired by C, Elixir
and Common Lisp. It could be described as C with Elixir modules,
pattern matching, and a semantic object system. The idea is to plug
modules, closures, pattern matching, a graph database and
metaprogramming into C99 with an extremely small set of dependencies.

Supported operating systems (additionnal dependencies) :
 - BSD
 - Linux (libbsd, libmd)
 - MacOS X (libmd)
 - Windows (MSys2)

Supported architectures :
 - aarch64 (arm64, Apple M1, Apple M2)
 - amd64
 - i386
 - sparc64

## 1.1.1 Modules

Everything in KC3 is in a module. A module is a namespace,
and is named with a symbol starting with a uppercase character.
For instance `Sym` and `Str` are valid module names.

Use defmodule to define a module. Example :
```elixir
defmodule Test do
  def one = 1
  def double = fn (x) { x * 2 }
  def add = cfn Tag "tag_add" (Tag, Tag, Result)
end
```

Each module can define a type and a module name can also be a
type name if the corresponding module defines a type.

Use defstruct to define a struct type in a module. The struct will have
the same name as the module. Example :
```elixir
ikc3> defmodule Test do
ikc3>   defstruct [x: (F32) 0.0,
ikc3>              y: (F32) 0.0]
ikc3> end
ikc3> a = %Test{}
%Test{x: (F32) 0.0,
      y: (F32) 0.0}
ikc3> a.x
(F32) 0.0
ikc3> a.y
(F32) 0.0
```

The module can also include definitions for constants or functions for
operating on the module type or other types.

The default module is `KC3`, which is defined as facts (triples)
in `lib/kc3/0.1/kc3.facts`.

## 1.1.2 Data types

Basic data types in KC3 are :
 - Strings : `Str`, e.g. `"Hello, world !"`
 - Symbols : `Sym`, e.g. `:hello` or `Hello`
 - Booleans : `Bool`, `true` or `false`
 - Numbers
   - Integers
     - Small integers
       - Signed small integers : `S8`, `S16`, `S32`, `S64`, `Sw`
       - Unsigned small integers : `U8`, `U16`, `U32`, `U64`, `Uw`
     - Large integers : `Integer`
   - Rational numbers (fractions of integers) : `Ratio`, e.g. `-2/3`
   - Floating point numbers : `F32`, `F64`, `F128`
   - Complex numbers (i = √(-1)) : `Complex`, e.g. `1 +i 2`
 - Lists : `List`, e.g. `[1, 2, 3]`
 - Tuples : `Tuple`, e.g. `{:ok, 123}`
 - Maps : `Map`, e.g. `%{id: 1, login: "dx"}`
 - Structs : e.g. `%GL.Sphere{}`
 - Quoted code : `Quote`, e.g. `quote quote 1 + 2`
 - Identifiers : `Ident`, e.g. `quote List.map`
 - Function or operator call : `Call`, e.g. `quote sqrt(1)`, `quote 1 + 2`
 - Code blocks : `Block`, e.g. `{ 1 + 2; 3 + 4 }`
 - Function : `Fn`, e.g. `fn (x) { x * 2 }`
 - C function : `Cfn`, e.g. `cfn Tag "tag_add" (Tag, Tag, Result)`
 - Unquoted code: `Unquote`, e.g. `quote 1 + unquote(x)`
 - Variables : `Var`, e.g. `?`
 - Void : `Void`, e.g. `void`

---

Top : [KC3 documentation](../)

Previous : [1 KC3](./)

Next : [1.02 Array](1.02_Array)
